---
layout: post
title: "Boston Key Party 2015 'Airport' writeup"
categories: writeups bkp2015
tags: crypto
author: niklasb
---

*Airport* was a cryptography challenge worth 500 points at the Boston Key Party
CTF 2015.

We're provided access to a remote server that [implements a custom crypto
protocol](https://github.com/kitctf/writeups/blob/master/bkp2015/airport/airport.py.c8830782c42d5a14ac2efffa22a4eed1):

1. Let *p = 2q + 1 = 2732...5727* be a [safe prime](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safe_prime) (i.e. *q* is prime too).
2. Choose a random integer *s* from the range *[1, (p-1)/2)*.
3. Read an integer *b* from the client.
4. If *b<sup>s</sup> ≡ 4 (mod p)*, send the flag to the client. Otherwise,
   send *b<sup>s</sup> <b>mod</b> p* to the client and go to step 3.

Reconstruction *s* from only a set of *(b, s)* pairs is hard according to the
[Discrete logarithm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_logarithm)
conjecture. However, the server also leaks timing information to the client
because it uses the following square-and-multiply implementation for step 4:

{% highlight python %}
def slowpower(base, power, mod):
    accum = 1
    for bit in bin(power)[2:]:
        if accum == 4:
            time.sleep(1.0)
        accum = accum*accum % mod
        if bit == '1':
            accum = accum*base % mod
    return accum
{% endhighlight %}

From now on, we assume that we can compute arbitrary roots modulo p, i.e.
we can compute a function *root(n, y, p)* with the property that
*(root(n, y, p))<sup>n</sup> ≡ y (mod p)*. We will go into the details of how
to implement this function below.

Equipped with this, we can:

* Given *s*, compute *b* such that *b<sup>s</sup> ≡ 4 (mod p)*, using *b
  = root(s, 4, p)*. This will allow us to solve the task once we figure out
  *s*.
* Check whether *s* starts with a given bit string *P*. Let's say *P = 101*.
If *s = 101...<sub>2</sub>* (the subscribed 2 means base 2, i.e. binary), then
after 3 iterations of the `slowpower` loop, we have *accum ≡ base<sup>101<sub>2</sub></sup>*.
If *base = root(101<sub>2</sub>, 4, p)*, then this will cause the sleep function to be
called, which we can measure. If the binary representation of *s* does not
start with *101*, then it is very likely that no sleep will occur.

Using the second primitive, we can reconstruct *s* bit by bit using the
following algorithm:

{% highlight python %}
s = socket.create_connection((SERVER, PORT))

# ... solve proof-of-work test

def oracle(b):
    """ Let the server compute b^s mod p. If the result is 4, print
    the flag. Otherwise, return the result and the timing. """
    t0 = time.time()
    s.send(str(b) + '\n')
    ans = s.recv(4096)
    t = time.time() - t0
    if any(c not in "0123456789" for c in ans):
        print ans
        sys.exit(0)
    return int(ans), t

prefix = 1
while True:
    prefix <<= 1
    # check the two possible hypotheses on the extension of s
    _, a = oracle(root(prefix | 0, 4, p))
    _, b = oracle(root(prefix | 1, 4, p))
    print bin(prefix>>1), a, b
    # no difference in timing, we are at the last bit
    if abs(a - b) < 0.5:
        break
    if b > a:
        # the version with an appended 1 bit took longer, so it is the correct guess
        prefix |= 1

# there are two possible options for the last bit, check them using the
# exponentiation oracle
for c in (prefix | 0, prefix | 1):
    if oracle(13)[0] == pow(13, c, p):
        s = c
        break
else:
    # something went wrong
    assert 0

# send the final guess and get the flag
oracle(root(s, 4, p))
{% endhighlight %}

And, after apprixmately 2048 seconds of waiting:

    0b1 1.10669398308 0.115952014923
    0b10 0.0756859779358 1.15882515907
    0b101 0.160202026367 1.19808292389
    0b1011 0.161967039108 1.16554093361
    0b10111 1.18343901634 0.153500080109
    0b101110 0.153550863266 1.1789689064
    0b1011101 1.18081712723 0.135214090347
    ...
    FLAG{diffie_hellman_im_awfully_fond_of_youuuuuu}

All that remains is filling in the implementation of the *root* function, for
which we will present two options below.

## Computing arbitrary roots modulo a prime

The problem is, given *n* and *y*, find an *x* such that *x<sup>n</sup>
≡ y (mod p)*.

Assume that *n = 2k + 1* is an odd number. We then have *gcd(n, p - 1) = 1*
because *p - 1 = 2q* with *q* prime. Thus, the
[modular inverse of *n* modulo *p*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_multiplicative_inverse)
exists. Let's call it *u*. It can be computed using the [extended Euclidean
algorithm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Euclidean_algorithm). By definition,
we have *u · n ≡ 1 (mod p - 1)*. With *x = y<sup>u</sup>* we then have
*x<sup>n</sup> ≡ y<sup>u · n</sup> ≡ y<sup>1 + k(p - 1)</sup> ≡ y · (y<sup>p
- 1</sup>)<sup>k</sup> (mod p)* for some *k*. Now according to [Fermat's little
  theorem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermat%27s_little_theorem), this means
  that *x<sup>n</sup> ≡ y · 1<sup>k</sup> ≡ y (mod p)*. Thus *x* is the *n*-th
  root of *y* that we were looking for.

The case with *n = 2k* is a bit more complicated: First note that if *z* is
a square root of *y*, i.e. *z<sup>2</sup> ≡ y (mod p)*, then *x = root(k, z,
p)* is the solution we are looking for. Luckily for us, computing square roots
modulo the given *p* is not hard. Since *p ≡ 3 (mod 4)*, we can use a [theorem due to
Lagrange](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadratic_residue#Prime_or_prime_power_modulus)
to compute a square root *z*: It says that *z = y<sup>(p+1)/4</sup> <b>mod</b> p* is
a possible solution.

In Python, the implementation might look like this:

{% highlight py %}
def ex_gcd(a, b):
    x1 = 0; y1 = 1
    x = 1; y = 0
    while b:
        q = a / b; r = a % b
        x2 = x - q * x1; y2 = y - q * y1
        a = b; b = r; x = x1; x1 = x2; y = y1; y1 = y2
    return a, x, y

def root2(y, p):
    """ Solve x^2 == y (mod p) """
    assert p % 4 == 3
    x = pow(y, (p+1)/4, p)
    assert pow(x, 2, p) == y
    return x

def root(n, y, p):
    """ Solve x^n == y (mod p) """
    g, u, _ = ex_gcd(n, p-1)
    if g == 2:
        return root(n/2, root2(y, p), p)
    assert g == 1
    u %= p-1
    x = pow(y, u, p)
    assert pow(x, n, p) == y
    return x
{% endhighlight %}

## Solving the captcha

This part is very standard, we just brute-force the suffix until we find
a match:

{% highlight py %}
pref = s.recv(4096)
assert len(pref) == 12
print "Solving challenge %s" % pref
hashes = set()
i = 0
while True:
    answer = pref + ''.join(chr(random.randint(0,0xff)) for _ in xrange(8))
    assert len(answer) == 20
    ha = hashlib.sha1()
    ha.update(answer)
    d = ha.digest()
    hashes.add(d[-3:])
    if ha.digest().endswith('\xff\xff\xff'):
        break
    i += 1
    if i % 100000 == 0:
        print i, len(hashes)
print "Done!"
s.send(answer)
{% endhighlight %}

The [final exploit code](https://github.com/kitctf/writeups/blob/master/bkp2015/airport/airport.py.c8830782c42d5a14ac2efffa22a4eed1)
can be found in our Github repository.
